Would you like to think more complexly? Understand why certain things happen
to you sometimes seemingly by chance, sometime seemingly by law? Or to
become more productive finding shortcuts where no one else is looking? What
about improving your relationships understanding why certain arguments truly
arise? What would you think if I told you that you can achieve these things by
working smarter, not harder? I’ve yet to meet a person who wouldn’t say “Sign
me up!” I, too, want all of those things for my life. I’m here to show you how it
just might be possible with a shift in your thinking. A paradigm shift in the way
you think about the world to systems thinking.
Everything in the world around us is part of a system. A system is a combination
of both physical and abstract things, and how those things interact in relation to
one another. Systems thinking is being able to examine and analyze ourselves
and the things around us with the express purpose of being able to improve upon
them. It requires us to be more observant and aware of the things that impact us,
in both big and small ways, and then be willing to take the necessary steps to
change the obstacles in our path.
Your whole life is a system. It is made up of a lot of parts that interact with one
another. First, you have physical components like your body and the things
around you that you can touch: your house, car, clothes, cell phone, books, etc.
Then we add in the abstract pieces to the puzzle: your beliefs, convictions, ideas,
and values — everything that defines your core sense of self and makes you who
you are on the inside. Finally, we incorporate the things in your life which you
do not have complete control over, like your relationships, your health, and your
finances. All of these things work together to make up the system of your life.
In systems thinking, it is often helpful to make diagrams so that we can visualize
and better understand how things influence one another and work together
within the whole system. It is only then that we really begin to be able to break
down and analyze our systems so that we can improve them. Systems thinking is
not something that will happen overnight and immediately come easily. It is a
way of looking at the world that will take time to develop.
Let’s start by thinking of your life as a system. When you begin to diagram,
map, or list the components of your life as a system, begin by thinking of the
people you encounter and the things you do nearly every day, as those will have
a great impact on your life system. Your list may begin to take shape like this:
You (your body) Boss/ Colleagues Sleep
Friends Career Food
Family Hygiene Exercise
While you would be off to a good start, the list of your life as a system would be
nowhere near complete (although that is all many outside observers may assume
your list includes). You would need to add many more components to it, such as:
Pets Beliefs Faith
Car House Clothes
Health Wealth Worries
Values Cell Phone Computer
Television Acquaintances Traffic
Books Newspapers Internet
Education Bills Social Media
Weather Prices/Costs World Events
Financial Markets Fears Grocery Shopping
Now the combination of the two lists would be much closer to an accurate
representation of a life system, but it is by no means an exhaustive list.
Everyone’s life system will be unique.
Once you have drawn, written, or mapped out your list, you are now ready to
start analyzing it. The beauty now is that you are more aware of the things that
are impacting the system of your life. You are tuned in to how you are spending
your time, and whether there are improvements that can be made to increase
your productivity and help you achieve your goals. You can be more cognizant
of the ways in which the parts of your life system interact with one another and
impact your life. You can begin to make the kinds of positive changes that you
would perhaps never even have realized you needed without shifting the way
you look at the world to systems thinking.
Systems thinking is, at its heart, looking at problems in a way we haven’t before.
It is a realization that everything is interconnected, and we should look at things
as a whole rather than just a group of independent parts. Systems thinking means
looking at the big picture first, then digging in deeper to examine its parts and
focusing on the relationships between them. It is a supportive framework that
helps you develop habits in your mind. Those habits give you feelings of
strength and power that make you understand you have the ability to tackle even
the most complex problems and affect positive change. [i]
Anytime we can create habits in our minds, we save time, because we can do
things without having to consciously think about them, and thus our brains are
free to think about other things. Making an investment by taking some time at
the beginning to solve a problem, either by changing a system that isn’t working
or creating a new system, will save so much more time in the long run. This
holds true whether you are working toward a personal or professional goal.
Adopting even just a little bit of systems thinking into your life can help you to
improve countless areas.
In this book, we will explore the basics of systems thinking. We will examine its
elements and see how it works. We will develop the tools you need to help you
apply systems thinking to your daily life and relationships.
Along with a powerful paradigm shift in the way you look at the world and the
problems you may encounter in it comes the opportunity for making mistakes.
We will study three of the many possible errors that may arise in systems and
help you to avoid or overcome them.
It’s time to take the first step toward seeing our world through a different lens,
and it all begins with a turn of the page.
Chapter 1: What is Systems Thinking?
As a teacher, I often found that visual demonstrations were the best at helping
my students to understand difficult or abstract concepts. For one lesson, I
brought in a boomerang, a curved, flat piece of wood designed to be thrown and
originally used as a weapon for hunting. I opened a box containing a boomerang
and held the boomerang in my hand, walking around so that my students could
see it up close. Then I threw the boomerang. I asked my students what made the
boomerang come back to me. They unanimously thought it was me throwing the
boomerang. I told them that we would further test their theory. I held the box
that the boomerang came in and threw it the same way.
Of course, this time the box did not come back to me, but rather flew for a short
distance and dropped to the ground. We went on to discuss that it clearly was not
my hand or the way I threw the boomerang that made it behave the way it did.
When my hand released the boomerang, it freed the boomerang to operate in the
way its structure was designed to. While we were discussing a lesson on physics,
the same lesson is central to systems theory. Systems thinking allows behavior
that is already present within the structure of a system to be suppressed or
released as we study and understand systems and problems.
What is Systems Thinking?
The term “systems thinking” was coined by Barry Richmond in 1987. According
to Richmond, “Systems thinking is the art and science of making reliable
inferences about behavior by developing an increasingly deep understanding of
underlying structure.” [ii] In The Fifth Discipline Fieldbook, author Peter Senge
states, “Systems thinking [is] a way of thinking about, and a language for
describing and understanding, the forces and interrelationships that shape the
behavior of systems. This discipline helps us to see how to change systems more
effectively, and to act more in tune with the natural processes of the natural and
economic world.” [iii]
In order to get a better understanding of what these two experts are telling us,
let’s go back to the basics. What is a system? A system is a group of things that
are interconnected and demonstrate their own behavior pattern over time.
Systems are usually the cause of their own behavior. Even when outside forces
act on a system, it reacts in a way that is consistent with the character of the
system. If the same outside forces were to act on a different system, there would
likely be a different outcome.
Why is thinking in systems useful?
Systems thinking helps us look at the world in a new way because it encourages
us to look at events and patterns by focusing on the connection and relationship
between a system’s parts, instead of only looking at the individual parts in
isolation. Systems thinking leads us away from trying to come up with a quick
fix to a problem, which we too often do, in favor of considering the long-term
consequences our actions may cause. It supports a deeper level of understanding
than we typically take the time to seek.
Systems thinking is a paradigm shift from our more traditional thinking patterns
because we have been taught to look at things rationally, and to try to look for
clear cause and effect connections. We are now used to trying to study things in
small, digestible pieces, and to attempting to solve problems as quickly as
possible by taking control of situations around us. Quite often, we focus on
external sources as the cause of all of our problems instead of looking internally
at our systems to see what improvements can be made.
Western culture tends to look for a problem’s cause as coming from outside of
our systems, instead of within. There are times throughout our history when this
worldview has proven very effective. Many big problems have been solved by
looking outward, like finding cures and vaccines for deadly diseases, finding
ways to produce enough food to feed the people of the world, and developing
mass transportation systems. The problem is that when we fail to take the time to
examine our internal systems as well, sometimes our solutions create new
problems. These problems can be significant, serious, and very hard to
overcome, if they are really ingrained in the structure of a system.
While that traditional method of analysis may be helpful at times, it can’t help us
to solve every problem we face despite all of our best efforts. War, harm caused
to our environment, people suffering from drug addiction, people who are
unemployed or living in poverty, and many life-threatening diseases are all
examples of problems that remain despite years of analysis and technological
advances. These problems persist because they are systems problems. No one
wanted to create them and everyone wants them to be solved, but they won’t be
until we take a good, hard look at the structures of the systems they are part of.
Instead of looking to assign blame as to what caused the problem, we need to
roll up our sleeves and dive deeper to find a solution. The solutions are within
our reach if we are willing to do what is necessary to find them. We need to be
willing to look at things from a whole new perspective. This book is all about
showing us a different way of seeing and thinking about the world and
everything in it.
That’s why systems thinking is so vitally important. Some problems are systems
problems. No matter what we do, these problems simply won’t go away though
linear or event oriented thinking. After all, it has been said the definition of
insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different
results. There is nothing wrong with linear thinking. There is a time and a place
for it, for sure. It has served us well on countless occasions throughout human
history. Thinking in systems just gives us a more complex and complete picture
of events.
As we have discussed previously, systems thinking doesn’t immediately come
easily to most people and it takes time to develop this skill and adopt the new
way of seeing the world until it becomes an automatic habit. In fact, up to 95%
of our population is unable to think in systems. They focus on searching for a
simple cause and effect connection when it comes to solving problems. The
difficulty lies in that it simply won’t give a complete and accurate view of the
problem, and it is ineffective in solving systemic issues.
Systems thinking allows us to reclaim our instinct about whole systems while we
strengthen our abilities to understand their parts and how they are
interconnected. Thinking in systems enables us to ask “what-if” questions about
the behaviors we may see in the future, and gives us license to be bold enough to
unleash our creativity when it comes to redesigning our systems. We begin to
come up with solutions that would never have crossed our minds before.
Systems thinking gives us a complete picture by allowing us to examine the
interconnected relationships between the system’s components instead of only
looking at them as independent individual parts. It brings to mind an activity I
did with my kids when they were little. I blindfolded them and set out bowls of
ingredients on the kitchen counter, telling them we were going to work on a
project together. I asked them to feel the items one by one and tell me what they
thought we were going to do. When they felt the licorice, they thought it might
be a pencil. After feeling the gumdrops, they thought they were marshmallows,
and that either rice Krispy treats or hot chocolate were in their very near future.
The gumballs threw them again, as they believed they might be marbles and part
of a game we would play together. They were torn between thinking that the
icing was either toothpaste or the shaving cream that we practice spelling words
in. I chuckled all along at where their imaginations were taking them with each
item they touched. Even though they were blindfolded, I could see that my kids
were confused. They were trying to see how everything might fit together, but
by only being introduced to the parts one at a time, they had too limited
information to draw any reasonable conclusions from. After I was finished
torturing my children by keeping them in suspense far longer than they liked, I
removed their blindfolds and revealed the activity they were about to enjoy:
making gingerbread houses. Finally they understood how everything was
connected, and it all made perfect sense.
The fun I had with my kids can teach us a lesson about systems thinking. It is
impossible to know the behavior of a system just by knowing the parts that make
up that system. We have to dig deeper to understand the relationships between
those parts and the impact they have on the system as a whole. That is a central
tenant of systems thinking, and one we should never ignore.
No one thinking method is better than the others. There are times and places to
use them all. Systems thinking is not better than linear thinking. They are both
necessary for us to see and appreciate the world around us completely and in all
its complexity. Trying to only use one way of thinking is like going through the
world with one eye closed. It distorts our perception and limits what we can
accomplish. All ways of thinking are necessary in order for us to get the whole
picture.

Chapter 11: Key Takeaways from Systems Thinking
Systems thinking is a whole new way for us to look at ourselves, our businesses,
our relationships, and the world around us. It is such a paradigm shift from our
more traditional ways of thinking that it becomes a guiding philosophy for the
way we approach and analyze so many parts of our lives. It involves being aware
that the choices we make may have unintended consequences, so they deserve
careful and deliberate thought.
Systems thinking at its core starts with observing data and events, looking for
patterns in behavior that occur over time, uncovering the structures that are the
driving forces behind the behavior, studying and changing the structures that are
no longer helpful, using our curiosity to be open to a variety of possible
solutions to a problem, and ultimately being brave enough to choose the best
possible long-term solution rather than an easy fix, or just the one that is the
most popular.
Why use systems thinking?
Knowledge is power. When we know better, we do better. Systems thinking
expands our thinking and opens us up to many possible solutions as we look at
problems in new ways. We can make more informed choices, knowing that there
is no such thing as a perfect solution and every choice we make will impact
other parts of the system because it is all interconnected. Systems thinking
allows us to be aware of the impact of our choices and to do everything in our
power to limit any negative consequences that may arise from them.
When should we use systems thinking?
Systems thinking is very effective in helping to solve a variety of complex
problems. If the concern is important, the problem has occurred repeatedly and
has a history that can be studied and analyzed, and people have tried to solve the
problem in the past with little or no success, it is a prime candidate for a systems
thinking approach.
How do you use systems thinking? [xl]
Begin by asking new questions. People are naturally inclined to want to assign
blame for a problem. It is a quick and easy “fix” and it makes us feel better. It
has been said that “the definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and
over and expecting a different result.” While there is some debate over the origin
of this quote, it offers us important insight into systems thinking. We need to
break free from the blame game and instead be willing to ask the tougher
questions like, “What is it that we are missing?” or “What don’t we understand
about the problem?”
When you begin your systems thinking analysis, it is entirely possible that the
data and information before you will just be the tip of the iceberg. There is so
much more that you can discover beneath the surface by examining not just
events that occur, but also patterns of behavior and the structure in place
responsible for driving those behavior patterns over time.
Be sure to speak with everyone in the system so that all of their viewpoints are
represented. In the beginning, everyone will see the problem through a different
lens. It is only by being willing to listen to all perspectives that you can truly get
to the heart of the problem. Once you have gathered all of the information you
need, then you will ultimately update everyone as to your findings so that is
possible to all be on the same page moving forward.
When you begin laying out visual representations of the problem so that you can
look at it in a new way, start with causal loop diagrams. Start out small and keep
things simple. You can always add more elements to the loop as you need them.
Keep the story broken into small, digestible parts for as long as possible without
trying to overcomplicate the loops with too many details (especially if the details
are about things totally beyond your control or inconsequential to the problem
before you). It is hoped that the causal loops will reveal connections between
parts of the system that may have gone previously unnoticed. Try not to get hung
up on whether the loop you are creating is right or wrong. If it accurately shows
the group’s current perception of reality, then it is doing what it is designed to
do.
Lessons we can learn from systems thinking
There are many lessons to be learned from systems thinking. Incorporating even
a few of these lessons into your daily life might impact your life pleasantly in
unexpected ways.
Often we think systems are failing just because they aren’t performing in the
ways we think they should. In fact, the system might be performing exactly as it
should. We need to look at what the system is doing well and then see how it
was designed for that. Then, if we want the system to behave differently, we can
simply change the design to help it meet its new purpose. In our lives, if we
interview for a job and don’t get it, we think we have failed. Instead, we could
look at the interview we had as a means of improving ourselves and our skills, so
that we will be better prepared in the future when the right job for us comes
along.
When we try to solve problems, we often make the mistake of assuming that
they occur in isolation. In reality, problems are usually just as interconnected as
systems are. For example, if the vegetables in a garden won’t grow to their full
potential, we may assume that it is because they did not receive enough water.
That may very well be just one reason and we may find that the real cause could
be any of a number of, or a combination of, possibilities, such as the quality of
the soil, not receiving the proper amount of sunlight, the quality of the seeds that
were planted, the length of the growing season, average temperature, insects, and
elevation, among many others. Being open to a variety of possible solutions can
help us persevere when we are faced with the most daunting or frustrating
problems.
Feedback from systems can provide us with invaluable learning opportunities.
We should always seek to gain knowledge from every life experience. It will
serve to improve our analytical skills and sense of awareness, making us better
equipped to make evaluations and judgments or the systems we encounter.
It is important to keep in mind that there are always delays once we apply
feedback to a system. We can’t expect the results to happen instantly. In fact, if
we don’t take into account that there will inevitably be delays, we may make the
mistake of incorrectly thinking additional interventions are needed when the
ones we have implemented just need time for them to take hold and produce
results. We should avoid getting discouraged and giving up in favor of letting
things play out. After all, the best things come to those who wait.
When we try to solve complex problems without a systems thinking approach, it
may make a difficult situation even worse. When we rush to find a cause of the
problem without looking carefully at the systems behavior patterns and
interconnected parts, we may find ourselves only addressing the symptoms
instead of getting to the root of the problem. This can lead to us missing some of
the unintended consequences that may arise from the decisions we make. A
systems thinking approach can help us to minimize those negative unintended
consequences or avoid them altogether.
We have all heard our parents at one point in time tell us that they would rather
we learn from their mistakes rather than repeating them. Systems are similar in
that often, the problems and behavior patterns we witness today have already
been present in multiple systems throughout time. By looking at the similar
patterns of feedback cycles and delays that have been seen over and over again
(called systems archetypes), we are able to more quickly spot dominant behavior
patterns in our own current systems. Being aware of how current events in our
lives compare to those we have already faced in our past gives us strength and
knowledge as we deal with them, because we realize we already have some
experience to back us up.
The most effective place to act in a system in order to achieve the best results
often couldn’t be further away from where we expect it to be. They key to
dealing with systems thinking in both our personal and professional lives is to
keep an open mind. If we are truly open to all possibilities, the best solution is
bound to find its way in.
An example of systems thinking at its finest
Every system that involves human beings is bound to include errors, as there is
no such thing as a perfect person who never makes mistakes. The healthcare
system is no different. The National Institute of Health issued a report “To Err is
Human” that looks into errors in the field of healthcare. The following findings
were a part of this report.
The healthcare system has always studied why medical professionals made
mistakes. Until the last few decades, the focus was on the individual who made
the error. Blame was assigned to the doctor or nurse who made the mistake, and
a punishment was issued in the hopes that it might prevent errors from occurring
in the future.
More recently, there was a shift in thinking when it came to analyzing medical
mistakes. Instead of only looking at an individual as being solely responsible, the
healthcare system found that evaluating the failures in the systems that led to the
error was much more helpful in preventing similar errors in the future. Assigning
blame was not given as much importance as finding ways to improve systems
and make proactive decisions to prevent potentially life threatening errors from
happening again.
When an error was made, everything in the system was analyzed from the way
medication was labeled, to whether the staff was overworked with too many
patients or hours on their schedule, to whether the order issued by the doctor was
able to be clearly and easily understood, and many more influencing factors. It
was often discovered that an error had happened well in advance of when it
actually manifested itself.
The healthcare system had confidence that its employees wanted to help the
patient above all else, but also understood that they were human, so mistakes
would be made. They made the decision to encourage their employees to be
honest about reporting errors by creating a safer and more blame-free
environment in which they could do so. They believed that learning from
mistakes and improving systems was more important than issuing punishments.
As a result, systems thinking has helped to make things like systems for
reporting errors, checklists that must be followed for procedures, and guidelines
for patient safety standard practice in healthcare.
Systems thinking is a powerful way of thinking that has great potential to impact
our lives in so many ways, if we are open to all of the benefits and lessons it has
to offer.
Conclusion
Systems thinking is a major paradigm shift from the more traditional ways of
thinking that we are so familiar with, and may have grown too comfortable and
complacent in exclusively relying upon, throughout our lives. There are so many
important lessons we have learned that it will serve us well to review a few of
the highlights as we begin our journey into implanting systems thinking into our
lives.
In a system, everything is interconnected. It is all about how the
relationships and connections between the parts impact the system
as a whole. Changing one part of a system will impact the entire
system.
Every action and decision will have unintended consequences, so
taking the time to analyze a system carefully, instead of rushing to
find a “quick and easy fix,” is key.
If you want to change a system, it is more efficient and impactful to
change the interconnections and purpose or function than it is to
change the elements. Changing the rules and relationships can often
create a “whole new system.”
Looking at problems deeply and from a multitude of perspectives
with an open mind will increase the likelihood of finding a lasting
positive solution.
Taking the time to look at an event, and then examining the
behavior patterns of a system in the quest for deeper understanding
by asking new questions, is important if we are interested in finding
the best possible solutions to the complex problems we face today.
To systems thinkers, there is no final, definitive answer. An answer
is often the beginning to a new question.
Systems thinking is a whole new way for us to look at ourselves, our businesses,
our relationships, and the world around us. It involves being aware that the
choices we make may have unintended consequences, so they deserve careful
and deliberate thought.
Knowledge is power. When we know better, we do better. Systems thinking
expands our cognition and opens us up to many possible solutions as we look at
problems in new ways. We can make more informed choices knowing that there
is no such thing as a perfect solution, and every choice we make will impact
other parts of the system because it is all interconnected.
Systems thinking is not what human nature is automatically inclined to do. It
will not come easily to us or happen immediately, but with time and practice, we
can become systems thinkers. I don’t promise that it will be easy, but it will be
worth it.
I wish you much success as you take your systems thinking approach and set out
to conquer the world one complex problem at a time.
Steven
